.. _building-and-installing-section-label:

Building and installing Open MPI
================================

.. note:: If you have checked out a *developer's copy* of Open MPI
   (i.e., you cloned from Git), you really need to read :doc:`the
   Developer's Guide </developers>` before attempting to build Open
   MPI. Really.

Open MPI uses a traditional ``configure`` script paired with ``make``
to build.  Typical installs can be of the pattern:

.. code-block:: sh

   shell$ ./configure [...options...]
   # Use an integer value of N for parallel builds
   shell$ make [-j N] all install
   # Depending on where Open MPI installs, you may need root access
   # for the following:
   shell$ make install

Definitions
-----------

* **Source tree:** The tree where the Open MPI source code is located.
  It is typically the result of expanding an Open MPI distribution
  source code bundle, such as a tarball.
* **Build tree:** The tree where Open MPI was built.  It is always
  related to a specific source tree, but may actually be a different
  tree (:ref:`since Open MPI supports VPATH builds
  <building-open-mpi-vpath-label>`).  Specifically, this is the tree
  where you invoked ``configure``, ``make``, etc. to build and install
  Open MPI.
* **Installation tree:** The tree where Open MPI was installed.  It is
  typically the "prefix" argument given to Open MPI's ``configure``
  script; it is the directory from which you run installed Open MPI
  executables.


Filesystem requirements
-----------------------

.. _install-filesystem-timestamp-warning-label:

.. warning:: If you are building Open MPI on a network filesystem, the
   machine you on which you are building *must* be time-synchronized
   with the file server.

Specifically: Open MPI's build system *requires* accurate filesystem
timestamps.  If your ``make`` output includes warning about timestamps
in the future or runs GNU Automake, Autoconf, and/or Libtool, perhaps
looking something like this::

   Warning: File `Makefile.am' has modification time 3.6e+04 s in the future

**Know that this is not normal**, and you likely have an invalid
build.

In this case, you should remove the Open MPI source directory and
start over (e.g., by re-extracting the Open MPI tarball): either
switch to build on a local filesystem, or ensure that the time on your
build machine is synchronized with the time on your file server before
building again.


.. _building-open-mpi-vpath-label:

VPATH builds
------------

VPATH build are fully supported. For example::

   shell$ tar xf openmpi-VERSION.tar.gz
   shell$ cd openmpi-VERSION
   shell$ mkdir build
   shell$ cd build
   shell$ ../configure ...
   <... lots of output ...>
   shell$ make -j 4


.. _install-configure-compilers-and-flags-label:

Specifying compilers and flags
------------------------------

Changing the compilers that Open MPI uses to build itself uses the
standard Autoconf mechanism of setting special environment variables
either before invoking ``configure`` or on the ``configure`` command
line itself The following environment variables are recognized by
``configure``:

* ``CC``: C compiler to use
* ``CFLAGS``: Compile flags to pass to the C compiler
* ``CPPFLAGS``: Preprocessor flags to pass to the C compiler
* ``CXX``: C++ compiler to use
* ``CXXFLAGS``: Compile flags to pass to the C++ compiler
* ``CXXCPPFLAGS``: Preprocessor flags to pass to the C++ compiler
* ``FC``: Fortran compiler to use
* ``FCFLAGS``: Compile flags to pass to the Fortran compiler
* ``LDFLAGS``: Linker flags to pass to all compilers
* ``LIBS``: Libraries to pass to all compilers (it is rarely
  necessary for users to need to specify additional ``LIBS``)
* ``PKG_CONFIG``: Path to the ``pkg-config`` utility

For example, to build with a specific instance of GCC::

   shell$ ./configure \
       CC=/opt/gcc-a.b.c/bin/gcc \
       CXX=/opt/gcc-a.b.c/bin/g++ \
       FC=/opt/gcc-a.b.c/bin/gfortran ...

Here's another example, this time showing building with the Intel
compiler suite::

   shell$ ./configure CC=icc CXX=icpc FC=ifort ...

.. note:: We generally suggest using the above command line form for
   setting different compilers (vs. setting environment variables and
   then invoking ``./configure``).  The above form will save all
   variables and values in the ``config.log`` file, which makes
   post-mortem analysis easier if problems occur.

Note that the flags you specify must be compatible across all the
compilers.  In particular, flags specified to one language compiler
must generate code that can be compiled and linked against code that
is generated by the other language compilers.  For example, on a 64
bit system where the compiler default is to build 32 bit executables:

.. code-block:: sh

   # Assuming the GNU compiler suite
   shell$ ./configure CFLAGS=-m64 ...

will produce 64 bit C objects, but 32 bit objects for Fortran.  These
codes will be incompatible with each other, and Open MPI will not build
successfully.  Instead, you must specify building 64 bit objects for
*all* languages:

.. code-block:: sh

   # Assuming the GNU compiler suite
   shell$ ./configure CFLAGS=-m64 CXXFLAGS=-m64 FCFLAGS=-m64 ...

The above command line will pass ``-m64`` to all the compilers, and
therefore will produce 64 bit objects for all languages.

.. warning:: Note that setting ``CFLAGS`` (etc.) does *not* affect the
             flags used by the wrapper compilers.  In the above,
             example, you may also need to add ``-m64`` to various
             ``--with-wrapper-FOO`` options:

             .. code-block::

                shell$ ./configure CFLAGS=-m64 CXXFLAGS=-m64 FCFLAGS=-m64 \
                   --with-wrapper-cflags=-m64 \
                   --with-wrapper-cxxflags=-m64 \
                   --with-wrapper-fcflags=-m64 ...

             Failure to do this will result in MPI applications
             failing to compile / link properly.

Note that if you intend to compile Open MPI with a ``make`` other than
the default one in your ``PATH``, then you must either set the ``$MAKE``
environment variable before invoking Open MPI's ``configure`` script, or
pass ``MAKE=your_make_prog`` to configure.  For example:

.. code-block:: sh

   shell$ ./configure MAKE=/path/to/my/make ...

This could be the case, for instance, if you have a shell alias for
``make``, or you always type ``gmake`` out of habit.  Failure to tell
``configure`` which non-default ``make`` you will use to compile Open MPI
can result in undefined behavior (meaning: don't do that).

Note that you may also want to ensure that the value of
``LD_LIBRARY_PATH`` is set appropriately (or not at all) for your build
(or whatever environment variable is relevant for your operating
system).  For example, some users have been tripped up by setting to
use a non-default Fortran compiler via the ``FC`` environment variable,
but then failing to set ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH`` to include the directory
containing that non-default Fortran compiler's support libraries.
This causes Open MPI's ``configure`` script to fail when it tries to
compile / link / run simple Fortran programs.

It is required that the compilers specified be compile and link
compatible, meaning that object files created by one compiler must be
able to be linked with object files from the other compilers and
produce correctly functioning executables.


Bundled vs. system support libraries
------------------------------------

Open MPI uses the following support libraries:

* `Hardware Locality (hwloc) <https://www.open-mpi.org/projects/hwloc/>`_
* `Libevent <https://libevent.org/>`_

Full copies of these libraries are included in the Open MPI source
code distribution.  That being said, your environment may already have
installed versions of these libraries.

From a performance perspective, there is no significant reason
to choose the bundled vs. system-installed hwloc and Libevent
installations.  Specifically: both will likely give the same
performance.

There are other reasons to choose one or the other, however.

First, some background: Open MPI has internally used `hwloc
<https://www.open-mpi.org/projects/hwloc/>`_ and `Libevent
<https://libevent.org/>`_ for almost its entire life.  Years ago, it
was not common for hwloc and/or Libevent to be available on many
systems, so the Open MPI community decided to bundle entire copies of
the hwloc and Libevent source code in Open MPI distribution tarballs.

This system worked well: Open MPI used the bundled copies of hwloc and
Libevent which a) guaranteed that those packages would be available
(vs. telling users that they had to separately download/install those
packages before installing Open MPI), and b) guaranteed that the
versions of hwloc and Libevent were suitable for Open MPI's
requirements.

In the last few years, two things have changed:

#. hwloc and Libevent are now installed on many more systems by
   default.
#. The hwloc and Libevent APIs have stabilized such that a wide
   variety of hwloc/Libevent release versions are suitable for Open MPI's
   requirements.

While not *all* systems have hwloc and Libevent available by default
(cough cough MacOS cough cough), it is now common enough that -- with
the suggestion from Open MPI's downstream packagers -- Open MPI
|ompi_series| "prefers" system-installed hwloc and Libevent
installations over its own bundled copies.

Meaning: if ``configure`` finds a suitable system-installed hwloc and/or
Libevent, ``configure`` will choose to use those installations instead of
the bundled copies in the Open MPI source tree.

That being said, there definitely are obscure technical corner cases
and philosophical reasons to force the choice of one or the other.  As
such, Open MPI provides ``configure`` command line options listed in
this section that can be used to specify exact behavior in searching
for hwloc and/or Libevent.

From Open MPI's perspective, it is always safe to use the bundled
copies.  If there is ever a problem or conflict with the
system-supplied Libevent or hwloc, you can specify
``--with-hwloc=internal`` and/or ``--with-libevent=internal``, and
this will likely solve your problem.

Additionally, note that Open MPI's ``configure`` will check some version
and functionality aspects from system-installed hwloc / Libevent, and
may still choose the bundled copies over system-installed copies
(e.g., the system-installed version is too low, the system-installed
version is not thread safe, ... etc.).


``configure`` command line options
----------------------------------

There are many available ``configure`` options (see ``./configure
--help`` for a full list); some commonly used options are described
below.

Conventions
^^^^^^^^^^^

``configure`` will, by default, search for header files and/or
libraries for various optional features (e.g., various HPC network
API/support libraries).  If the relevant files are found, Open MPI
will built support for that feature.  If they are not found, Open MPI
will skip building support for that feature.

However, if you specify ``--with-FOO`` (where ``FOO`` is the
corresponding CLI option name for the feature) on the ``configure``
command line and Open MPI is unable to find relevant support for
``FOO``, ``configure`` will assume that it was unable to provide a
feature that was specifically requested and will abort so that a human
can resolve out the issue.

.. note:: Using ``--with-FOO`` to force Open MPI's ``configure``
          script to abort it if can't find support for a given feature
          may be preferable to unexpectedly discovering at run-time
          that Open MPI is missing support for a critical feature.

Additionally, if a search directory is specified for ``FOO`` in the
form ``--with-FOO=DIR``, Open MPI will:

#. Search for ``FOO``'s header files in ``DIR/include``.
#. Search for ``FOO``'s library files:

   #. If ``--with-FOO-libdir=<libdir>`` was specified, search in
      ``<libdir>``.
   #. Otherwise, search in ``DIR/lib``, and if they are not found
      there, search again in ``DIR/lib64``.

#. If both the relevant header files and libraries are found:

   #. Open MPI will build support for ``FOO``.
   #. If the root path where the FOO libraries are found is neither
      ``/usr`` nor ``/usr/local``, Open MPI will compile itself with
      RPATH flags pointing to the directory where ``FOO``'s libraries
      are located.  Open MPI does not RPATH ``/usr/lib[64]`` and
      ``/usr/local/lib[64]`` because many systems already search these
      directories for run-time libraries by default; adding RPATH for
      them could have unintended consequences for the search path
      ordering.

.. note:: The ``--with-FOO-libdir=DIR`` options are not usually
          needed; they are typically only needed when ``FOO``'s
          libraries are installed in an "unexpected" location.

          Also note the difference between ``--with-FOO=DIR`` and
          ``--with-FOO-subdir=DIR``: the former is a directory to
          which suffixes such as ``/include`` and ``/lib`` are added,
          whereas the latter is assumed to be a full library directory
          name (e.g., ``/opt/some_library/lib``).


.. include:: building-open-mpi-configure-options-installation.rst
.. include:: building-open-mpi-configure-options-networking.rst
.. include:: building-open-mpi-configure-options-runtime.rst
.. include:: building-open-mpi-configure-options-support-libraries.rst
.. include:: building-open-mpi-configure-options-mpi.rst
.. include:: building-open-mpi-configure-options-oshmem.rst
.. include:: building-open-mpi-configure-options-misc.rst


``configure`` output summary
----------------------------

At the end of ``configure``, a summary of many configuration options
are shown.

The Open MPI Team *highly* recommends examining the ``configure``
summary to validate that Open MPI plans to build all the features that
you expect it to build.

If the summary does not agree with what you think should be done, you
can look earlier in ``configure``'s output to see why particular
options and behaviors were selected.


``make`` targets
----------------

Open MPI supports all the ``make`` targets that are provided by GNU
Automake, such as:

* ``all``: build the entire Open MPI package
* ``install``: install Open MPI
* ``uninstall``: remove all traces of Open MPI from the installation tree
* ``clean``: clean out the build tree

Once Open MPI has been built and installed, it is safe to run ``make
clean`` and/or remove the entire build tree.

Generally speaking, the only thing that users need to do to use Open
MPI is ensure that ``PREFIX/bin`` is in their ``PATH`` and
``PREFIX/lib`` is in their ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH``.  Users may need to
ensure to set the ``PATH`` and ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH`` in their shell
setup files (e.g., ``.bashrc``, ``.cshrc``) so that non-interactive
``ssh``-based logins will be able to find the Open MPI executables.


.. _building-open-mpi-installation-location-label:

Installation location
---------------------

A common environment to run Open MPI is in a "Beowulf"-class or
similar cluster (e.g., a bunch of 1U servers in a bunch of racks).
Simply stated, Open MPI can run on a group of servers or workstations
connected by a network.  As mentioned above, there are several
prerequisites, however (for example, you typically must have an
account on all the machines, you can ``ssh`` between the nodes without
using a password, etc.).

This raises the question for Open MPI system administrators: where to
install the Open MPI binaries, header files, etc.?  This discussion
mainly addresses this question for homogeneous clusters (i.e., where
all nodes and operating systems are the same), although elements of
this discussion apply to heterogeneous clusters as well.

There are two common approaches:

#. Have a common filesystem, such as NFS, between all the machines to
   be used.  Install Open MPI such that the installation directory is
   the *same value* on each node.  This will *greatly* simplify user's
   shell startup scripts (e.g., ``.bashrc``, ``.cshrc``, ``.profile``
   etc.)  |mdash| the ``PATH`` can be set without checking which
   machine the user is on.  It also simplifies the system
   administrator's job; when the time comes to patch or otherwise
   upgrade Open MPI, only one copy needs to be modified.

   For example, consider a cluster of four machines: ``inky``,
   ``blinky``, ``pinky``, and ``clyde``.

   * Install Open MPI on ``inky``'s local hard drive in the directory
     ``/opt/openmpi-VERSION``.  The system administrator then
     mounts ``inky:/opt/openmpi-VERSION`` on the remaining three
     machines, such that ``/opt/openmpi-VERSION`` on all machines
     is effectively "the same".  That is, the following directories
     all contain the Open MPI installation:

     .. code-block::

        inky:/opt/openmpi-VERSION
        blinky:/opt/openmpi-VERSION
        pinky:/opt/openmpi-VERSION
        clyde:/opt/openmpi-VERSION

   * Install Open MPI on ``inky``'s local hard drive in the directory
     ``/usr/local/openmpi-VERSION``.  The system administrator then
     mounts ``inky:/usr/local/openmpi-VERSION`` on *all four*
     machines in some other common location, such as
     ``/opt/openmpi-VERSION`` (a symbolic link can be installed on
     ``inky`` instead of a mount point for efficiency).  This strategy
     is typically used for environments where one tree is NFS
     exported, but another tree is typically used for the location of
     actual installation.  For example, the following directories all
     contain the Open MPI installation:

     .. code-block::

        inky:/opt/openmpi-VERSION
        blinky:/opt/openmpi-VERSION
        pinky:/opt/openmpi-VERSION
        clyde:/opt/openmpi-VERSION

     Notice that there are the same four directories as the previous
     example, but on ``inky``, the directory is *actually* located in
     ``/usr/local/openmpi-VERSION``.

   There is a bit of a disadvantage in this approach; each of the
   remote nodes have to incur NFS (or whatever filesystem is used)
   delays to access the Open MPI directory tree.  However, both the
   administration ease and low cost (relatively speaking) of using a
   networked file system usually greatly outweighs the cost.  Indeed,
   once an MPI application is past MPI initialization, it doesn't use
   the Open MPI binaries very much.

#. If you are concerned with networked filesystem costs of accessing
   the Open MPI binaries, you can install Open MPI on the local hard
   drive of each node in your system.  Again, it is *highly* advisable
   to install Open MPI in the *same* directory on each node so that
   each user's ``PATH`` can be set to the same value, regardless of
   the node that a user has logged on to.

   This approach will save some network latency of accessing the Open
   MPI binaries, but is typically only used where users are very
   concerned about squeezing every single cycle out of their machines,
   or are running at extreme scale where a networked filesystem may
   get overwhelmed by filesystem requests for Open MPI binaries when
   running very large parallel jobs.


.. _building-open-mpi-install-overwrite-label:

Installing over a prior Open MPI installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Open MPI team does not recommend installing a new version of Open
MPI over an existing / older installation of Open MPI.

In its default configuration, an Open MPI installation consists of
several shared libraries, header files, executables, and plugins
(dynamic shared objects |mdash| DSOs).  These installation files act
together as a single entity.  The specific filenames and
contents of these files are subject to change between different
versions of Open MPI.

.. important:: Installing one version of Open MPI does not uninstall
               another version.

If you install a new version of Open MPI over an older version, this
may not remove or overwrite all the files from the older version.
Hence, you may end up with an incompatible muddle of files from two
different installations |mdash| which can cause problems.

The Open MPI team recommends one of the following methods for
upgrading your Open MPI installation:

* Install newer versions of Open MPI into a different directory. For
  example, install into ``/opt/openmpi-a.b.c`` and
  ``/opt/openmpi-x.y.z`` for versions a.b.c and x.y.z, respectively.
* Completely uninstall the old version of Open MPI before installing
  the new version.  The ``make uninstall`` process from Open MPI a.b.c
  build tree should completely uninstall that version from the
  installation tree, making it safe to install a new version (e.g.,
  version x.y.z) into the same installation tree.
* Remove the old installation directory entirely and then install the
  new version.  For example ``rm -rf /opt/openmpi`` *(assuming that
  there is nothing else of value in this tree!)* The installation of
  Open MPI x.y.z will safely re-create the ``/opt/openmpi`` tree.
  This method is preferable if you no longer have the source and build
  trees to Open MPI a.b.c available from which to ``make
  uninstall``.
* Go into the Open MPI a.b.c installation directory and manually
  remove all old Open MPI files.  Then install Open MPI x.y.z into the
  same installation directory.  This can be a somewhat painful,
  annoying, and error-prone process.  *We do not recommend it.*
  Indeed, if you no longer have access to the original Open MPI a.b.c
  source and build trees, it may be far simpler to download Open MPI
  version a.b.c again from the Open MPI web site, configure it with
  the same installation prefix, and then run ``make uninstall``.  Or
  use one of the other methods, above.

Relocating an Open MPI installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It can be desireable to initially install Open MPI to one location
(e.g., ``/path/to/openmpi``) and then later move it to another
location (e.g., ``/opt/myproduct/bundled-openmpi-a.b.c``).

.. note:: Open MPI hard-codes some directory paths in its executables
          based on installation paths specified by the ``configure``
          script.  For example, if you configure with an installation
          prefix of ``/opt/openmpi/``, Open MPI encodes in its
          executables that it should be able to find its help files in
          ``/opt/openmpi/share/openmpi``.

The "installdirs" functionality in Open MPI lets you change any of
these hard-coded directory paths at run time (*assuming* that you have
already adjusted your ``PATH`` and/or ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH`` environment
variables to the new location where Open MPI now resides).  There are
three methods:

#. **Move an existing Open MPI installation to a new prefix:** Set the
   ``OPAL_PREFIX`` environment variable before launching Open MPI.
   For example, if Open MPI had initially been installed to
   ``/opt/openmpi`` and the entire ``openmpi`` tree was later moved to
   ``/home/openmpi``, setting ``OPAL_PREFIX`` to ``/home/openmpi``
   will enable Open MPI to function properly.

#. **"Stage" an Open MPI installation in a temporary location:** When
   *creating* self-contained installation packages, systems such as RPM
   install Open MPI into temporary locations.  The package system then
   bundles up everything under the temporary location into a package
   that can be installed into its real location later.  For example,
   when *creating* an RPM that will be installed to ``/opt/openmpi``,
   the RPM system will transparently prepend a "destination directory"
   (or "destdir") to the installation directory.  As such, Open MPI
   will think that it is installed in ``/opt/openmpi``, but it is
   actually temporarily installed in (for example)
   ``/var/rpm/build.1234/opt/openmpi``.  If it is necessary to *use*
   Open MPI while it is installed in this staging area, the
   ``OPAL_DESTDIR`` environment variable can be used; setting
   ``OPAL_DESTDIR`` to ``/var/rpm/build.1234`` will automatically
   prefix every directory such that Open MPI can function properly.

#. **Overriding individual directories:** Open MPI uses the
   GNU-specified directories (per Autoconf/Automake), and can be
   overridden by setting environment variables directly related to
   their common names.  The list of environment variables that can be
   used is:

   * ``OPAL_PREFIX``
   * ``OPAL_EXEC_PREFIX``
   * ``OPAL_BINDIR``
   * ``OPAL_SBINDIR``
   * ``OPAL_LIBEXECDIR``
   * ``OPAL_DATAROOTDIR``
   * ``OPAL_DATADIR``
   * ``OPAL_SYSCONFDIR``
   * ``OPAL_SHAREDSTATEDIR``
   * ``OPAL_LOCALSTATEDIR``
   * ``OPAL_LIBDIR``
   * ``OPAL_INCLUDEDIR``
   * ``OPAL_INFODIR``
   * ``OPAL_MANDIR``
   * ``OPAL_PKGDATADIR``
   * ``OPAL_PKGLIBDIR``
   * ``OPAL_PKGINCLUDEDIR``

   Note that not all of the directories listed above are used by Open
   MPI; they are listed here in entirety for completeness.

   Also note that several directories listed above are defined in
   terms of other directories.  For example, the ``$bindir`` is
   defined by default as ``$prefix/bin``.  Hence, overriding the
   ``$prefix`` (via ``OPAL_PREFIX``) will automatically change the
   first part of the ``$bindir`` (which is how method 1 described
   above works).  Alternatively, ``OPAL_BINDIR`` can be set to an
   absolute value that ignores ``$prefix`` altogether.
